The way I think of it, it's like the
biggest 20 trillion dollar market that
no one talks about.
>> So you think about global trade, about
20 trillion dollars of global trade in
goods uh goes through trade finance
programs.
>> Commodity finance is a specialized
subset of trade finance and it's about
four or five trillion dollars. Okay.
>> So as a huge market, it sort of
surprises me sometimes that it doesn't
get more headlines, but it's not that
glamorous. It's kind of boring. And so
when things go well, it doesn't really
create the drama that headlines are
seeking.
>> Well, this is the I mean to be fair,
this is the case with almost anything
which is that you never hear about
anything when things are going well and
that including any types of finance and
hopefully you know ideally you would
never hear about any finance because
>> warehouse shipment successfully makes
it.
>> Yeah. Right. It wouldn't make for to be
honest as a journalist I wouldn't
>> client pays receivable on time.
Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy
Aloway
>> and I'm Joe Weisenthal.
>> Joe, I think I've told you this before,
but way back when I was starting in
financial journalism, I really wanted to
be a commodities reporter.
>> I get it. It's a seems fun. It seems
real. Seems like one of the few areas of
uh finance that's like not just a
screen. You know what I'm saying? where
there's more there's a physicality to
it, right?
>> Yeah. But also like you know everyone's
like this is a relationship business but
I feel like commodities you know
everyone in finance says that right
>> do your banker impression again.
>> This is a this is a relation but right
but everyone says that in finance this
is a relationship business but actually
commodities seems to be one of those
areas where actually that's a real thing
and not just a cliche and stuff. So I
get it. It seems to be very
idiosyncratic where like one load of
whatever commodity might not be
completely funible with the same
commodity. Yeah.
>> Because we call it commodities and yet
>> um but you know so I had this like
romantic idea in my head of what a
commodities reporter actually does which
is like I don't know go on ships and
travel alongside like huge things of
coal and metal and aluminum and stuff
like that which is probably not
realistic. One aspect of commodities
that I never really appreciated was how
much financialization there actually is
in the market and that there are so many
different players in the market. We've
sort of touched on it before with the
straight of Hormuz situation where
>> you know you have the insurers and then
you have the reinsurers and you have
like insurers for the freight and for
the hole and for like liability and it
just seems so complicated.
>> You have a very similar situation on the
financing side. Sure.
>> And it struck me that we have never
actually done a commodity financing
episode.
>> No. And I'm really interested in this
because again like one of these things
you always hear about capital
efficiency, right? This is very
important. And so okay, here's like
let's say we do not know I don't know
what the cost of moving so and so many
kilograms of copper from one place to
another is. Whatever that cost is, I
probably don't want to tie up all of my
capital at the I probably want to put
down a fraction of the thing, borrow the
rest, etc., then pay off that loan when
the ship gets there, etc., so that I'm
as liquid as possible at any given
moment. This is just like I'm sort of
like this is my first principles. I
don't know anything about this space but
I assume that there are a lot of
calculations like this within the
process of procuring mining delivering
commodities.
>> Absolutely. So today we are going to
learn about commodity finance. We're
also going to try to get a handle on
what's going on in the commodities world
right now given some of the disruptions
that we've seen. And I'm glad to say we
do in fact have the perfect guest. Uh
we're going to be speaking with Lewis
Hart. He is of course the head of
corporate advisory and banking at Brown
Brothers Haramman. someone who lives and
breathes commodity finance.
>> Thanks, Tracy. Thanks, Joe. It's great
to be here.
>> Would you say you know more about
commodity finance or '9s hiphop and R&B?
>> Oo, that's a tough one. Very close. Very
close.
>> I'm throwing that out of nowhere. He's a
big uh hip-hop guy.
>> Tracy knows me well. Interesting. Tracy
knows me well.
>> We should just go back and we just talk
about that.
>> No, we should just go.
>> Okay. What's commodity finance? Like,
what exactly are we trying to achieve
here? It's a good question and the way I
think of it, it's like the biggest 20
trillion dollar market that no one talks
about.
>> So you think about global trade about
$20 trillion of global trade in goods
>> uh goes through trade finance programs.
>> Commodity finance is a specialized
subset of trade finance and it's about
four or five trillion. Okay. So, as a
huge market, it sort of surprises me
sometimes that it doesn't get more
headlines, but it's not that glamorous.
It's kind of boring. And so, when things
go well, it doesn't really create the
drama that headlines are seeking. Well,
this is the I mean, to be fair, this is
the case with almost anything, which is
that you never hear about anything when
things are going well and that including
any types of finance. And hopefully, you
know, ideally, you would never hear
about any finance because
>> warehouse shipment successfully makes
it.
>> Yeah. Right. It wouldn't make for to be
honest as a journalist I wouldn't
>> client pays receivable on time.
>> Yeah, client pays receivable on time.
When I think about finance generally, I
think about like who is a consumer of
financial services and what services are
they actually I guess purchasing or who
when do people find the need for
finance, right? So a homeowner
occasionally needs financial or a home
buyer suddenly needs is a purchaser of
the financial services through a
mortgage, right? Etc. What is a
canonical or modal example of a consumer
of commodity finance?
>> Sure. Well, it's really the business of
financing motion. And so the classic
example would be a commodity merchant.
>> Okay.
>> Commodity merchant kind of evokes a lot
of history, right? You think back to
Renaissance Italy and
>> the Metache and all the merchants that
kind of pioneered global trade in those
days and actually goes back even
further. You can go back to even uh the
BCS and see trade finance happening.
>> But the typical consumer is a physical
merchant and they may be in the energy
space. They may be in the metal space
>> or they may be in the agricultural
space.
>> Their job is not to speculate on prices.
Contrary to popular belief,
>> you think commodity trader, most people
think speculation. That's actually not
what they do. They are essentially
supply chain managers. That's their
role. And they are the largest consumers
of commodity finance.
>> And what are they purchasing?
>> They're purchasing, you said it well at
the beginning, ship loads of copper
cathode,
containers of coffee, green coffee,
unroasted coffee in burlap bags.
>> No, but like so sorry, just to clear
when I get a mortgage, I am purchasing
the ability to have to um have a minimal
monthly payment that's spread out over
30 years. Yeah. So that is what when I
like entering when I interface with a
bank or whatever mortgage broker I am
purchasing the ability to not destroy
all my liquidity when I buy a house. So
what is what are they now setting aside
the commodity that they're purchasing?
What are they purchasing from the bank?
>> Yeah. So essentially the basic product
is a line of credit. Okay. A secured
line of credit
>> and that line of credit kind of like a
credit card can be used to buy eligible
commodities. All right.
>> So, it's a line of credit that's
self-liquidating, meaning once you make
the loan, you know what the client's
buying and you know what the source of
repayment is. That's very different than
other types of lending that take much
longer to repay.
>> Okay?
>> So, it's very short-term. It's
selfquidating and it's secured by
inventory. And then when the inventory
is sold, it's secured by the account
receivable that results from the sale of
the inventory. The receivable gets paid
and then it keeps happening again and
again. and it revolves up and down. The
big variable that is always tricky is
what's the price of that commodity at
the time of the loan. And these
structures are designed to give clients
flexibility to buy the copper whether
it's $6 a pound, $4 a pound, $7 a pound.
It's hard to predict these capital
needs. And that's
>> most lenders like fixed amounts. This is
a floating dollar amount which is kind
of a unique part of it
>> where the value of the loan changes as
the price of the commodity changes.
>> Oh, that's interesting. Wait. Okay. So,
why do they need that flexibility?
>> Yeah. Explain that further.
>> Yes. So, good question. So, think about
um a client who's buying a pound of
coffee, right? Think about your local
coffee shop here. That coffee bean
traveled 2,000 miles from somewhere
likely in South America. It went through
a whole process of milling and
exporting. It went on a ship. It ended
up at a roster in the US and finally
made its way to a retail shop in
Manhattan. There's a ton of capital
involved there. That client likely
agreed to buy that coffee several months
in advance. The time when they actually
fix the contract and pay is when the
coffee ships typically. And at that
point, we don't know if the price is
going to be $3 a pound, $2 a pound, $1 a
pound. And so the the capital needs, you
kind of can figure them out within a
band, but sometimes things happen that
actually change what you thought.
>> And so we the the unique thing about a
commodity lender is they're marking to
market that inventory. So, if you
pledged me a pound of copper, I'll lend
you 75 cents, 80 cents, maybe more of
the value of that copper, whether it's
$3 a pound, 350 a pound, or 250 a pound.
>> Where does the commodity futures market
play into this? Because when we're
talking about the unpredictable nature
of we don't know the price of
commodities fluctuate you can lock in
prices in many commodities and not all
and I want to get into that
>> the non non financialized commodities
but to some extent doesn't the futures
market solve part of the problem of the
variability of the pricing.
>> It it does it solves in in one sense it
solves the price risk. So one of the key
risks in commodity finance is the price
risk. So if I'm lending against copper,
>> yeah,
>> and the price goes down, I better be
careful, right? My capital could be
impaired. So you use the futures market,
the derivatives market to hedge that
price risk. So we like to say our
clients are typically long physical,
meaning they own the inventory,
>> okay?
>> And they're short paper, they're short
futures contracts. That works really
well. But when prices go up, that means
they have to post margin calls. So, if I
have a $3 a pound copper shipment
>> and the price goes to 350 while it's on
the water coming from Chile to Georgia,
>> that client says, "I need to borrow more
money to keep my hedge open." And until
the ship arrives and the client pays for
the copper, that hedge is on and you
don't know what that margin call is
going to be.
>> This is what happened with like nickel a
few years ago, right? where you had
entities that were long nickel and still
got destroyed by the margin calls that
they experienced even though they were
on unlucky on some level on there. They
were on the right side of the right
side. Yeah, this is a slight tangent,
but you brought up coffee just then. Um,
I think both of us read Lloyd
Blankfine's book in preparation for
having him on the podcast and he was
talking how about how um when he was at
Jay Aaron they had the huge warehouses
of coffee beans and apparently they
smelled really bad cuz they would like
rot I guess or like their be
>> seems unoptimal. Yeah.
>> Yeah. What are you doing? Yeah.
>> Is that true? Do coffee beans actually
smell bad in large mouths?
>> I mean I like the smell. I've walked
through many coffee warehouses. Uh there
are a lot of them in New Orleans. There
are a lot of them in New Jersey. They're
basically burlap bags full of green
coffee unroasted. It smells pretty good.
So, I don't I'm not sure about that
story, but the good warehouses store
them well. They don't really degrade
that quickly. You know, they have a
pretty good shelf life and they can last
for a pretty long time before they start
to
>> decay. But you have to keep moisture
away. There are things you have to do to
secure the quality of them. and the good
warehouses are expert at handling those
back.
>> Okay, so this is actually a serious
question. Then when you're doing due
diligence for a loan, what are the
factors that you're taking into account?
Would you look at something like the
quality of the warehouse that
commodities are going to be stored in?
>> Absolutely. You would look at you would
have location eligibility requirements.
So you'd say, "I will lend against
coffee that's in this warehouse, this
warehouse, or this warehouse, but not
coffee that's in this warehouse for
whatever reason." So that's a big part
of your diligence. That's one risk. The
bigger risks are really what we touched
on, price risk,
>> counterparty risk is the second one. U
international risk, which I'm sure we'll
talk about. Where is the good that
you're financing? Hopefully it's moving.
Sometimes it may not be.
>> Um not at the moment. Yeah, exactly. In
some cases, it may not be. And the
biggest one I think that Brown Brothers
Herman particularly focuses on is the
management, the owners of the business.
What are their motivations? What's their
reputation?
>> What's their character? We have
something we call the five C's of
credit. It's kind of an old adage. And
those are character, collateral,
capital, conditions, and the most
important one we think is character. the
character of the borrower which really
comes out when markets get volatile. How
people behave and these are you started
saying accurately this is a super
relationship focused business character
is really the most important thing in
the business when you boil it all down.
So just to be clear here when we're
talking about okay a client comes and
whatever they have a need for some
coffee or whatever the other side is
this coming off of Brown brothers
Herman's balance sheet or these loans or
do you find other are you a middleman
for this or is it your own balance sheet
or both
>> so it's historically this market was
dominated by banks there was sort of a
group of banks
>> particularly European banks that
dominated I would say in the last 10
years many of those banks have actually
stepped away from the market for a
variety of reasons and as a result um
there not that many in the US who really
specialize in this we're one of them
>> uh but there are plenty of European
banks that really understand this
business
>> and what we've seen is you're seeing
more and more interest in this asset
class from institutional investors so
they like
>> short-term floating rates inflation
protection uncorrelated to the broader
equity markets. There's some really
attractive features in this.
>> It's historically been a very small
group of banks, but it's starting to
expand into the institutional investor
world.
>> So, are you selling that reselling that
risk in many cases?
>> We're typically holding the majority of
it. Okay. But we will syndicate risk out
to other investors from time to time as
well. And we have some partners that we
work with. We have different banks that
will essentially buy risk from Brown
Brothers. But we're always holding a
significant portion of the risk on our
balance sheet.
>> And how come the banks have exited the
business? Is that just like a 2008
regulatory capital story or something
else?
>> It's definitely a Basel story to some
extent. I think as Basel 4 has kind of
taken hold, you see more and more
capital requirements that make it harder
to issue letters of credit and things
like that. So that's definitely part of
it. I think another big part of it is
just the administrative intensity of
running this business. If you think
about tracking all this collateral as
it's moving around the world, you need
people. Now, over time, digitization is
going to take hold here, but uh you
still need knowhow. You need people. And
it's not easy to kind of run this
business every day if you don't have the
right people. We're fortunate to have a
very experienced team that knows how to
do this. We started 206 years ago in
this business. So, we've literally been
doing it
>> for over two centuries and that's a big
part I think of why we've stayed
committed. It's kind of the DNA of our
of our firm.
>> I think you know over time you're seeing
some banks coming back into it. But you
also saw in the energy space in
particular first of all big problems in
2015 during the correction. banks lost
some money and then you had ESG
pressures particularly around European
banks that caused some to say you know I
don't really want to be in the business
of financing this commodity or that
commodity I'm going to shift my
resources more to the renewable sector
for example um so those are you know all
the the factors that I think have
contributed to it but there is a group
of banks globally that has stayed
committed to this business through kind
of thick and thin and knows how to do it
has produced good returns turns very low
losses over time.
>> You know, you mentioned tracking um
commodities and shipments. How do you do
that exactly? And is it different to
what I can do?
>> Maps Go.
>> Yeah, Maps Go is pretty cool. I was
looking up something um the other day.
It was a uh it was a cargo of fertilizer
um leaving Saudi Arabia. It was pretty
easy to see like where the ship had left
from and where it was going and whether
it was on time. So, what what exactly
are you doing? So, you know, the the
bill of lighting is like I call it the
talisman of trade finance. It's this
really cool document. It's a title
document when it's negotiable. So, there
are four words to the order of that when
those four words are printed on a bill
of lighting. That means that whoever to
the order of the word after that, they
essentially control those goods. Those
bills of lighting have numbers and you
can type those numbers into, for
example, Bloomberg terminal has the
marine tracker app. We look at that. Um,
so we're using public source data to
really track that collateral when it's
necessary. You typically don't need to
do that unless it's something's going
wrong because ships tend to go where you
think they're going to go. Um, but that
is a tool with technology that makes it
much easier to actually track your
collateral while it's on the water. Once
it goes into a warehouse, you typically
get a warehouse receipt, which also can
be a title document, very important if
it has those four important words. And
in that case, you're often talking to
the warehouse directly. So you may say,
>> I'm the client may say, I'd like to
release these five bags of coffee or one
cappuccino to sell to um you know this
roster. Is that okay? And our team is
actually saying yes, please release
those. But that's on trust, what we call
a trust receipt and then they have to
give us an account receivable to replace
that within a certain number of days.
>> Interesting. Okay. So obviously in the
backdrop of this conversation is uh the
closure of the straight of Hormuz and
we'll get to that in a second but it
does raise a question I sort of hinted
at in the beginning. We all know that
oil um flows through the straight of
Hormuz and there's a futures market for
it that allows some uh ability to reduce
volatility or take out concerns.
Pistachios also flow through the
straight of Hormuz. There's no as far as
I can tell there's no pistachio futures.
I just looked it up on the terminal and
I'm curious, do you, first of all, a do
you do commodity finance for commodities
that don't have um hedging instruments?
>> So, one of my colleagues, this may shock
you, is on the board of the Peanut Tree
Nut Association. And so, um,
>> is it actually called the Peanut?
>> Peanut Tree Nut Association. It's a big
trade organization and we happen to
finance
>> peanuts aren't tree nuts, hence the name
has to be segregated.
>> You need peanuts and tree nuts in the
title. It's very very important, very
specific. So we we actually are active
in lots of non-hedgeible commodities
like cashews as a good example, pine
nuts,
>> uh pistachios less so, but um but all
kinds of non-hedgeible commodities that
would probably surprise you.
>> How does that change the calculus of
commodity finance when that instrument
doesn't exist?
>> Thinking about what's happening in the
street, um first of all, we're not the
largest player in the Middle East. I
think more more of the European banks,
but certainly we we're watching it
closely.
>> And I think what the media is really
focused on is kind of the oil side of
the story. So you keep hearing 20% of
global oil is trapped. The heart, the
largest disruption in the history of the
oil market. Those are all true. Uh you
see lots of activity in the price,
although it's mostly in the front month,
the front of the curve, not the back of
the curve. Um what I think we're
interested in actually in the lens of a
kamali banker versus the lens of sort of
an oil research analyst is how much
capital is actually trapped right
because
>> our business relies on turning over your
balance sheet. The commodity merchant
and the commodity banker
>> the fundamental principle is that
self-liquidating nature. So you buy it,
you sell it, you collect and then you do
it again.
>> It's velocity of money, right?
>> It's the velocity of the turnover. And
right now there is a lot of capital
that's stuck in the straight and it you
know it I see lots of different reports.
Is it something like500 commercial
vessels some number like that? I think
that's what the Pentagon said recently.
That's a lot of working capital. So you
know doing some rough math that's tens
of billions of dollars. Maybe it's more
than a hundred billion but it's a
massive number. And when all that gets
trapped and you have potentially margin
calls related to hedges on those
inventories, that can really strain your
liquidity if you don't have the right
financing structure behind you. And
that's why in these situations, you need
a bank that understands your business.
So if you were going to load an Aphax,
which is like typically 700,000 barrels
of oil, that's the capacity of an
Aframax vessel.
>> Before February 28th, the cost of that
might be 40 million, $45 million. Today,
it's more like 70 $75 million. And so
overnight, the cost of your single
shipment went up a significant amount.
And how do you finance that? Back to the
earlier point, you need a bank that can
be flexible enough to write a line of
credit that allows you to do financing
under a certain
>> Yeah.
>> guideline.
>> So, how are the banks actually handling
this at the moment? Because on the one
hand, like okay, the cost of actually
shipping stuff has gone up. On the other
hand, the value of the underlying
collateral, you know, assuming it's oil
or maybe steel or something like that,
has also gone up. But on the other hand,
as you point out, balance sheets are
probably a little more restricted if you
have these huge sums that are already
tied up because the ships aren't
actually moving.
>> Going back to COVID and then Russia,
Ukraine, first you had this huge supply
chain disruption. We all remember images
of container ships off the coast of Long
Beach. Two years later, we had the
Russian invasion of Ukraine and this
huge disruption in natural gas flows
from Russia to Europe
>> and those people didn't forget about
those things. So companies went out and
raised more capital
>> so that they were ready for the next
exogenous event. So I think
>> sorry when you say companies
>> commodity merchants okay
>> commodity merchants in this case yeah
>> commodity merchants specifically went
out as a result of the volatility in
those two events raised more capital so
they they're coming into this crisis
well funded and so so far things are
working okay actually there's not
>> evidence that things are breaking if
this lasts for months and months and
months you know who knows where it goes
but right now the system is functioning
well Actually the banks are supportive,
the commodity merchants are dealing with
the liquidity needs. They have enough
liquidity. We haven't heard of any major
issues yet. Uh but it's a matter of time
and if the strait doesn't open uh sooner
than later, then I think you could see,
you know, big strains because there's so
much trap capital
>> there. What actually happens
mechanically if I've financed a
particular shipment and it is now
hypothetically stuck in the straight of
hormuz like what conditions start to
kick in? putting if you're channeling
your inner commodity banker, the first
thing you're looking at is
>> is my collateral okay? Right? So, if
it's a shipment of oil,
>> is you know the crew okay? Is the um
ship in the right place? Is it going to
be at risk of, you know, being in a war
zone and having impairment? Once you
sort of get over that, you're looking at
the insurance, making sure the insurance
coverage is there. You're looking at
what does the charter contract say
between the merchant and the ship
operator and that's going to govern sort
of who pays for this detention voyage
frustration? They're different terms but
all those are going to be
>> is voyage frustration an actual term.
>> Yes. Frustration of voyage. Yes. Um, and
so this is, you know, demmerge is a
common term that that's when the
merchant is slow to load a vessel or
slow to discharge a vessel. This is
something a little different because
this is essentially a war zone. The
ships can't leave. And so it has
happened historically, but it hasn't
happened in a long time. And I know
everyone is sort of looking at the
contract, figuring out what the losses
and costs are, and then figuring out
who's responsible for what. It's not a
single answer. It's it's case by case.
>> Um but first you're looking at the
collateral. Then you're looking at does
my client have enough capital?
>> Yeah.
>> To withstand this. How many months,
days, you know, hopefully years could
they withstand if this actually never
opened?
>> Do you do like, you know, what would be
the equivalent of workouts with clients?
I mean, you know, here is a clearly
something that's not their fault. it's
an exogenous shock and so forth. you
probably would like to have that client
be with you five years from now when
hopefully that um hopefully the straits
open in five years and so forth and so
do you like okay like here's your money
some ow us but this would be really
stupid to put the screws to you now to
collect that maybe they have the capital
could make the payment but it would be
very unwise in the long term to put the
screws to the client to get that payment
back given that life is long and so
forth. Yeah, you we operate under the
principle that you don't put all your
eggs in one basket. So
>> supplier diversification is a really
important part of commodity risk
underwriting and that means if a client
has a 100% of their supply coming from
one region,
>> oh
>> you might get a little anxious about
that credit and say maybe not for us. So
typically there's enough diversification
that a single ship or series of ships
that are stuck in one place doesn't
cause the company to kind of seize up.
Um you know there may be some of that
out there but we're not seeing that with
our clients.
>> I'm sorry I want to just go back to
something because I didn't understand.
So you mentioned your colleague who's on
the peanut tree nut association.
>> Yes. Yes. Well, how like from from the
perspective of Brown Brothers Herman,
how does so like how does commodity
banking or finance work differently for
some of these more niche commodities
where the client does not have the
ability to go short to contrast the
physical
>> in non-hudgeible commodities. You're
also measuring price risk.
>> Yeah.
>> Typically in something like cashews as
an example.
>> Yeah.
>> They typically they cashew supply chain
is super interesting by the way. It
starts typically in West Africa. It
comes in something called raw seed. It
then gets shipped to Southeast Asia,
Vietnam, India.
>> And they extract this kernel.
>> And the kernel is what you eat. And
there's actually toxic liquid
>> in between the shell and the kernel.
Long story, but it's sort of a fun
supply chain. And then it gets exported
in edible form, typically from places
like Vietnam. And so it's a very long
supply chain. And typically what you're
relying on there because the price does
move a lot is a forward contract. And
that forward contract may not be
financially settled as it is in the
futures market. It may be I've sold this
all to XYZ buyer at ABC price.
>> Some maker of like sweets or something
like that.
>> Think about if you like cashews. If you
go to your local grocery store, it's
probably whoever sits in between your
local grocery store and our client that
is packaging and salting and all those
things.
>> I'm fascinated, Tracy. Oh, what?
>> So, I was looking up the toxic liquid
that comes from cashews and it's shil. I
I'm not sure I'm pronouncing that right,
but the stuff that comes from poison
ivy, which I am currently
>> suffering from. So, this is Yeah, this
is interesting to me.
>> This is really interesting to know. But
it's interesting, too. Like I remember
when we were in Alaska
um talk about we were talking about some
of the fishing that happens out there.
how much uh fish goes to Asia first to
be processed.
>> Yeah.
>> And it's really interesting to think
from just like these pure commodity
standpoints how I imagine a lot of the
value add of the supply chain is not
actually acrewing to the original origin
of the commodity but rather the entity
that can do processing most efficiently
through some combination of technology,
environmental standards, um labor costs
and so forth. I imagine a lot of the
value add in a say cashew comes there.
>> Yeah, it's it's I'd say a lot of the
value is happening kind of in the
midstream to that point in between
>> in between the upstream which would be
the farm for example in West Africa
>> and the client at the end
>> the retailer. So that's definitely true.
interesting fact about the peanut tree
nut market is that it's also full I want
to keep saying that um it's full of
family businesses and the other thing we
do a lot of is work with family
businesses so you sort of look at this
intersection of commodity trade finance
family business and in the middle of
those two overlapping circles is the
peanut tree nut industry
>> got it huh
>> just going back to collateral you know
one of the tropes um or jokes that often
gets brought up in commodities markets.
It's like I put on a physical oil trade
and like oh no, now I'm gonna have to
actually settle and take
>> take delivery of like 50 barrels of oil
in my studio apartment or something like
that. If you're in commodity finance, is
taking delivery of actual collateral
like is it a disaster for you the way it
is for other investors or is it kind of
that's what it's there for? These are
all collateralized loans.
>> Usually you wouldn't take delivery. it
if you didn't intend to. So, usually it
means something went wrong. There are
certain products where you actually buy
the commodity physically with a contract
to sell it back in the future. It's a
form of inventory financing called a
repurchase agreement. But typically,
your goal is to manage the credit so
it's a good company that doesn't default
on the loan and therefore you avoid
having to get out of the loan the second
way, which is liquidating the
collateral. So, you try to avoid that at
all costs. if you had to. The good news
is you can typically sell it in the
location where it exists. So if it's in
a tank in Houston and it's X barrels of
oil, you kind of say to someone else,
hey, can I sell you this? It's sitting
here and they'll quote you a price.
>> So it's it's not as dramatic as actually
arriving at our doorstep,
>> right?
>> Um and we try to avoid having to do
that. That's part of our job. Something
has gone wrong if we're doing that. But
it has happened before over our 206 year
history.
>> Once again going back to unhedgable
commodities and I asked this for a
different reason is um one of the things
and it's sort of commodityish. One of
the things that's very hot right now or
a lot of people are hoping that um
compute futures are going to be a thing
and that people will trade capacity of
an H100 Nvidia chip in the way and there
are some nent efforts and I don't know
if this is going to take off but I'm
curious like if there are any intuitions
that we can build based on existing
markets of what types of commodities
lend themselves to financialization that
way. So we don't have we have oil
futures and we have cotton futures. We
don't have pistachio futures. Is there
anything that we can look at and say yes
this type of market lends itself to
financialization on an exchange whereas
this one doesn't. So as in our minds we
can help try to predict whether this
will logically apply to something like
compute futures.
>> Yeah. So if you look at the origin of
the futures market it was really
designed to help farmers manage their
price risk. So think of a grain farmer
in Iowa.
>> Yeah.
>> Planting.
>> This is what they teach you in the
textbook. The farmer,
>> the farmer and the hedge and all that,
not the onion farmer.
>> But if you look at the properties of the
commodities that kind of lend themselves
to futures,
>> I think it's a few things. One is how
homogeneous is the product. So
>> the more heterogeneous the product is,
the harder it is to standardize into a
yeah financial contract.
>> Two is volatility. If there's no futures
market and it's moving all over the
place, there's going to be a lot of
demand from a producer, from an end user
for a futures market. So,
>> actually, memory chips and compute are
extremely volatile right now. We've been
thinking a lot about whether that's a
good candidate for a futures contract.
>> Interesting.
>> And if you're if you're a fab that's
producing chips right now,
>> you love the price you're getting,
right? I mean, maybe you've sold some of
it forward below the market, but as
you're kind of rolling your contracts,
it's very profitable, right? And could
you lock that in? On the other side, if
you're um an electronics consumer of
chips, you'd love to be able to hedge
that price and hedge your consumption.
So, I actually think it's a great
candidate for the futures market.
Whether it takes off, I, you know, I'm
not sure, but I know
>> some of the exchanges are spending a lot
of time on this right now. So,
>> I don't know when this particular
episode is coming out. We're recording
on May 27th, but very soon at our live
show, we will have
>> 28th. Yeah,
>> we will have an episode dedicated to,
you know, hearing from one company that
is trying to create a compute um
exchange and futures market basically.
So, that'll be interesting.
>> Yeah, I'm very interested in this
question.
>> I I think that part of the big story
with compute by the way that's
underfollowed is copper. So I think
everyone talks about power you know and
power is really important and
>> there needs to be lots of power capacity
in order to build the AI revolution.
>> Copper is as important and you see
copper prices at record highs
>> largely because of how much copper data
centers are consuming because of all the
electrical capacity that needs to be in
that infrastructure. Commodity
financiers, do they have good insight
into like trends in commodity prices
just by virtue of being able to see like
actual supply and demand on the ground?
>> In general, our philosophy is we don't
know where the price is going. So, we
try to be price agnostic,
>> but you can't help but notice trends,
see things early. And
>> one example would be in 2020 when COVID
hit, you just saw freight prices
skyrocketing. I think well before the
market you saw
>> things like steel going up quickly and
those prices being passed down the
supply chain. So you definitely can see
things that kind of feed into like the
PPI ultimately the CPI when you live
upstream the way we do in kind of these
metal energy a supply chains you often
see things first and before they
actually get transmitted into the
economic data. Now it's just one side of
it so it may not be conclusive but it
certainly provides us with lots of
interesting information.
>> The immediate postcoid period and um
freight prices you mentioned they
surged. I don't there's not a trucking
future trucking capacity futures market
but it occurs to me like okay here is a
situation in which you have this sort of
idiosyncratic moment and then it
probably wouldn't have made sense. I
don't know actually trucking like
>> is it in your mind like could that
eventually be a candidate for Yeah.
>> because you have these explosions of
price and so in the explosion of price
moment probably everyone's like I wish I
could hedge this right but then you
don't really know is this a permanent
fixture or is just this just a postcoid
thing where there was a one-time price
readjustment because if it's a one-time
price readjustment you don't really need
a futures market.
>> Yeah. And this we don't really know like
for memory is this like a one-time price
readjustment or is this a new permanent
fixture of the memory landscape? But
answering that question would be an
important part of whether it's worth it
to build out a futures market. But I'm
just curious like in the postcoid
environment were there people kicking
around the idea of freight futures or
something like that because it's like
what wakes wakes to this volatility?
They're not super liquid, but there are
tanker contracts you can
>> Yeah, I just noticed that Cape says, but
it looks like there's almost no
liquidity.
>> Yeah, there's not. The bid ask is pretty
wide, but people do try to make markets.
So, dry bulk freight, you can go long or
short. Um, trucking I think is a good
candidate for it. I think because
trucking in a lot of ways follows the
diesel market because the biggest kind
of variable cost of trucking is
>> so there's already an incent.
It's not perfect, but it's pretty highly
correlated. So
>> Tracy hinted at this in this um were
onion futures to be legalized would
onions themselves. So you've mentioned
>> now we're just doing hypothetical
>> you mentioned there are two conditions
that high price volatility and homog
homogeneity of the underlying commodity.
>> Yes. Would onions meet the ca meet the
condition such that were they to be
legalized they would be a good candidate
for uh financialization?
>> Well, one thing I'd worry about with
onions is perishability.
>> Yeah. You know, so I think putting
onions in a warehouse if you had a
physical settlement process
>> could be a little dangerous, you know,
because you can only store them for so
long.
>> Yeah.
>> Um but onions they are pretty
homogeneous as far as I know. I mean,
maybe I'm missing like a specific
>> Well, purple onion,
>> specific type of onion, white onion. So,
there's some basis red.
>> You know, my favorite onion is
>> the Texas 1015. Do you know what that
is?
>> No.
>> Never heard of that. What is that?
>> Yeah. It's a type of yellow onion that I
think was created at Texas&M University.
It's really sweet and tasty.
>> No, no. I mean, it's it's like any other
>> Texas A&M propaganda. Believe me, I
would be the last person to advocate for
Texas&M propaganda. No, look up Texas
1015. It's a really nice onion.
>> And I've got big onion growing plans.
>> Oh my god. It's the official state
vegetable of the state of Texas
according to Google's AI overview. So I
have no idea if that's true.
>> No way. I'm going to have to Yeah. No,
they're good.
>> All right. Well, we're learning all
sorts of things in this conversation. Um
I just want to go back to the idea of
seeing some trends before they kind of
um burst into the public consciousness.
So, one of the reasons I was tracking um
a ship last week was because it was
going um with its payload of fertilizer,
it was going from Saudi Arabia's Yamboo
port to Pang to Bangladesh. Um so,
basically, they had trucked a bunch of
fertilizer from the like Gulf side of
Saudi Arabia over to the African side of
Sa Saudi Arabia and were going round.
Are you seeing any new like trade routes
being established as a result of what's
going on in the straight of
>> I totally great question. I think we saw
that starting actually with the Houthi
issue in the Red Sea and if you think
about voyages for example from Shanghai
to Northern Europe take that route which
is a pretty big route. They used to go
through the Suez Canal. Suez Canal kind
of closes because ships are not
comfortable taking that risk. Suddenly
they're now routing around the Cape of
Good Hope. And back to my point on kind
of this age of bottlenecks and
disruption. That's adding you know 10 15
maybe more uh in terms of shipping days
which adds to the working capital
requirement
>> adds to the cost the day rate on the
ship the insurance. So absolutely seeing
a lot of that and I I would guess if the
straight of Hormuz
conflict continues for a lot longer,
there's going to be a lot of creativity
in terms of how to discharge cargos from
those ships, get them to safer ground
and then export them in some other way.
>> I would imagine if I were Saudi Arabia,
I'd be thinking about building pipelines
going the other direction. I'm sure
that's happening all over the Middle
East to try to avoid the strait. Even if
it does subside, I think people are
still going to want to find alternatives
because we've realized how reliant we
are on this one choke point.
>> All right, Lewis Hart, thank you so much
for coming on all thoughts. That was so
much fun.
>> Great to be here.
>> Yeah, Joe, I always enjoy those
commodity discussions. I feel like I
learn a lot of things like uh that is
also found in cashews. I had no idea.
>> And it sucks when it gets on your skin
because you've been gardening. I also
learned that there's a peanut tree nut
association.
Um, I learned about that.
>> Why didn't they call it like groundnut
tree nut association? Are there just
like not enough popular ground nuts?
>> Is peanut or ground nut?
>> That's what I thought.
>> I have no idea.
>> Doesn't it grow on like
>> I have I I have uh I have no idea. No, I
do think I love that conversation. I
guess you know. Yes.
>> Commodity, as you said, there's a sort
of romantic exciting element of
commodities that's very real. I mean
it's and it still exists. The fact that
you're having to like reroute trade
flows in real time. The fact
>> you're saying new trade routes
established. You know what I want to do
an episode on um is Asian food
processing because it's really
interesting to think about commodities
are grown all over the world or
agricultural commodities in particular
are grown all around the world but
essentially will all will all our will
so many will more and more of our food
come from East Asia even though we don't
think of East Asia as being a big
agricultural powerhouse per se
>> fish that blew my mind um when we heard
it last year. Also, okay, so I just
Googled this. I feel like we've been
doing a lot of like searches during this
conversation.
>> This actually sound of a good episode,
>> but apparently peanut is just another
word for groundnut. I always thought
peanut was a type of ground nut,
>> but it turns out they're just like
interchangeable terms. Yeah. So, in Asia
and India, they'll talk about groundnut
oil, which is just peanut oil.
>> Interesting.
>> We're learning a lot.
>> There you go.
>> And one other thing I wanted to say is,
you know,
It's becoming a cliche at this point,
but Lewis was talking about the idea of
all this capital tied up in the straight
of Hormuz, right? And like it's okay
now, but
>> in a few months,
>> but the longer it goes on, like the more
problematic it becomes. And this seems
to be like the overriding theme of this
entire shock, right?
>> Well, you know, it's interesting. Yes,
absolutely. Because we're recording this
May 27th, so tomorrow will have been the
three-month start of the war. Yeah,
>> I don't I don't know when this episode
is coming out. Um, but it's also
interesting to think that, you know, a
couple months ago when we were doing
commodity episodes, we would say like
the exact time of the episode, like, oh,
we're recording this at 10:30, right?
But now it just feels like this is just
this terminalable thing that's part of
the background. We're actually so deep
into it that it just like, yeah, it's
probably going to be closed a year from
now, too. And it just feels like no one
even, you know, it's like this has now
become so if the he has this feeling of
permanence that now it suddenly becomes,
yeah, I suppose things could change by
the time this episode comes out, but it
almost feels like it probably won't.
>> Yeah. Uh, we've definitely stopped doing
the minute-by-minut time stamp. Okay.
Shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the Odd
Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Tracy Aloway.
>> And I'm Joe Wisenthal. You can follow me
at the stalwart. Follow our producers
Carmen Rodriguez at Carmen Arman, Dashel
Bennett at D-Bot, Kale Brooks at
Kalebrooks, and Kevin Lozano at Kevin
Lloyd Lozano.
>> And for more Athoughts content, you
should check out our daily newsletter.
You can find that at
bloomberg.com/awthoughts.
>> And you can chat about all these topics
247 in our Discord, discord.gg/odlots.
>> And if you enjoyed this conversation,
then please leave a comment or like the
video, or better yet, subscribe.
>> Thanks for watching.